labs/README.md, before:

# Labs

This folder of the repository is where all your lab assignments and code will be
provided. You will fork the repository into your own private Bitbucket
repository, where you will make your additions to the code base. We use
Bitbucket because private repositories are free. On GitHub, you will need a paid
or an academic account to have private repos.  I will add assignments to
this repository throughout the semester so you will need to follow the
instructions below in order to keep your repository up-to-date, while also being
able to push changes up to your own personal repository.

## Sign up for Bitbucket

First, you'll need a Bitbucket account, so [sign up
here](https://bitbucket.org/account/signup/).

## Fork the repository

You'll need to fork this repository into your own private repository. In the
left hand menu you can click the '+' button.  A menu will slide out. Fork the
repository by clicking 'Fork this repository' to start the process.  Change the
name to be more descriptive and add a description if you like.  Check 'This is a
private repository', so no one else has access to it (we'll add your lab
teammates in a bit). Click the 'Fork repository' button.

## Share the repository

Since you're encouraged to work in teams for the labs, you'll probably want to
share the repository with your teammates.  You also must share your repository
with me (and our course assistants) so that we can grade your work. In the upper
right, there is usually an 'Invite users to this repo' box with a 'Send
invitation' button. Click the button to add users (my username is david_millman,
I will add our course assistants' usernames once I have them). If the 'Invite
users to this repo' box isn't there, you can also add users through the
'Settings' menu on the left hand side. Click 'Settings', then 'User and Group
access', where you can add users.

## Install Git

Now we need to make sure git is installed. There are a number of git GUI
clients, including Bitbucket's
[SourceTree](https://www.atlassian.com/software/sourcetree/overview), or
[others](http://git-scm.com/downloads/guis).  I'll leave you to figure out your
GUI of choice on your own if you like.  I always stick to the command line when
I can, so that's what I'll be showing you how to do. In a terminal run the
following:

    git --version

If you get an error you may need to [download and install
git](http://git-scm.com/downloads).  If you've never used git before you might
want to [read up on the docs](http://git-scm.com/doc), or go through the basics
with [Try Git](try.github.com).

## Clone your repository

To download your repository so it's ready for modifications, we need to clone
it.  Once git is installed, run the following command with <repo url> replaced
with the url to your repository (shown in the upper left of the Overview page on
Bitbucket).  It'll look something like
`https://david_millman@bitbucket.org/david_millman/csci440-spring2018.git`

    git clone <repo url>

It'll ask for your Bitbucket password. You'll have to enter your password every
time you want to push changes up to Bitbucket or pull changes down, unless you
set up SSH keys (go to Manage Account in the top right most menu, then under
security is SSH keys).

## How to pull the latest assignments

I'll be adding assignments here throughout the semester so you'll need to add
this repository as a remote that you can pull changes from. Make sure you cd
into your repository, something like (depending on what you named it):

    cd csci440-spring2018

Then let's list what remotes we currently have:

    git remote -v

You should see two entries for your Bitbucket repository, one (fetch) and one
(push). When you use `git push` or `git pull`, by default you'll push or pull
to/from that url. We want to add another entry that we can explicitly pull from
to merge in assignments as I add them. To do that, run the following:

    git remote add csci441 https://bitbucket.org/msu-cs/csci440-spring2018

Now if you run the `git remote -v` command you'll see two additional entries.
You won't have permission to push to this one, but you will be able to pull new
assignments by running the following:

    git pull csci441 master

Bitbucket also has shortcuts for syncing forked repositories. On the right hand
side on your Bitbucket repository, there will likely be a box indicating your
fork is out of sync when I add new labs. You can click the 'Sync now' link to
automatically pull in the new assignments.

## Install Qt

All assignments and labs will be written in C++ using OpenGL and Qt. Qt is a
cross platform UI framework. There are both commercial and open source licenses
for Qt.  We'll be using the open source version, which can be downloaded
[here](http://www.qt.io/download-open-source/).  Follow the instructions for
installation on your platform.

## Build Lab 1

Once you have Qt installed, try compiling and running the provided lab 1 code.
Qt projects are organized using project files (.pro files). The qt command
`qmake` can generate a Makefile (or an Xcode project, or a Visual Studio
project). I like to stick to using a Makefile so I can stay in a terminal:

    cd lab1
    qmake
    make
    ./lab1

    Windows users:
    cd lab1
    qmake
    mingw32-make
    cd release
    lab1.exe

It should print "Success" to the terminal and triangle.jpg should be a blank,
black image.  (In a future lab, it will be your job to make it output a
triangle). On the lab computers (in EPS 254, and others), multiple versions of
qt are installed on Fedora. To use the right version of qmake use `qmake-qt5`.

## How To Save Your Work

Once you start making changes to your code, you'll want to commit those changes
and push them back up to Bitbucket. You should do this often to keep a good
history of what changes you made and why. It also ensures your files are safely
stored on the server.

For every file you've changed or created, you'll want to run `git add <file
name>`. The command stages the file for commit. You can think of staging a file
as flagging that you want to save it in your next commit. Once you've staged
every file that you want to commit type:

    git commit -m "A short description of what you're committing"

It can be handy to see what files have been changed. To see what changes have
been made you can use `git status`. `git status` will show you which files
you've modified, which files are new and which files have been staged for
commit.

When working in a group, writing good commit messages are very important.  Your
collaborators (and even your future self) will be very thankful for well crafted
messages.  For more on how to write good commit messages, see blogs from
[erlang project](https://github.com/erlang/otp/wiki/writing-good-commit-messages),
[Tim Pope](http://tbaggery.com/2008/04/19/a-note-about-git-commit-messages.html),
or, [Chris Beams](https://chris.beams.io/posts/git-commit/).

Sometimes, git can be a little finicky if you have trailing white space in the
file. Often, your text editor or IDE has an option (or plugin) to automatically
trim trailing white space. It is a good idea to enable automatic trimming of
trailing white space as it can save your some headaches in the future.

Be careful of is to not commit files that are generated by the build process
(i.e. the Makefile, the final executable, .o files, etc.).  I've included a
.gitignore file in the repository that will ignore most files that will be
generated by your build processes, but others may be generated as well that I'm
not aware of (especially if you're running your code on Windows).

You can commit as many times as you want locally. When you're ready to submit
all your commits up to the server, where I can see them, run:

    git push origin master

If you've cloned your repository in more than one location (such as on a lab
computer and on your own laptop) and have made changes to one of them and pushed
those changes up to the server, you can use `git pull` from the other location
to bring it up to date.

## Submitting your work

For the labs, you may be able to just demo your work to me in class or in office
hours before the deadline, but this may be difficult as there are many students.
An alternative would be to submit a link on D2L with your team members' names,
for the assignment you're turning in and a link to your repository with all your
changes committed and pushed prior to the deadline.

** Note: Normally with git, forks are used to make changes to a repository that
you don't own. After implementing a feature, usually a pull request is issued
from your fork to the original repository. The maintainers of the original
repository can choose to incorporate your changes or not. Unfortunately, pull
requests on public repositories (like this one), are public as well. So if you
were to turn in your work using pull requests, anyone could view it, so we're
NOT using pull requests. **

## More Git Basics

Git is a distributed version control system (VCS). When you cloned the
repository above, you downloaded every change that has ever been made to the
repository. You can see each individual change by running the following:

    git log

You'll see a list of commits, which are changes to a set of files in your
repository. Each commit looks something like this (this is the first commit to
your repository, made by me):

    commit fd550eaab023eef5deb3f00aa2265d3dbbd5c5ed
    Author: David Millman <david.millman@montana.edu>
    Date:   Thu Jan 4 20:05:31 2018 -0700

        Add initial version of syllabus

The first line shows the hash value for the commit. If you ever want to revert
back to a specific commit you can use `git checkout <hash value>`. In your
repository, you can type the following to get to the very first change ever
made:

    git checkout fd550eaab023eef5deb3f00aa2265d3dbbd5c5ed

To get back to the lastest, you can run:

    git checkout master

For a more, check out a
[fully featured git cheat sheet](https://www.atlassian.com/git/tutorials/atlassian-git-cheatsheet).
The [official git documentation](http://git-scm.com/doc). And a great
course on [Udacity](https://www.udacity.com/course/how-to-use-git-and-github--ud775).

Commit message:

Add directions for submission over D2L

labs/README.md, after:

# Labs

This folder of the repository is where all your lab assignments and code will be
provided. You will fork the repository into your own private Bitbucket
repository, where you will make your additions to the code base. We use
Bitbucket because private repositories are free. On GitHub, you will need a paid
or an academic account to have private repos.  I will add assignments to
this repository throughout the semester so you will need to follow the
instructions below in order to keep your repository up-to-date, while also being
able to push changes up to your own personal repository.

## Sign up for Bitbucket

First, you'll need a Bitbucket account, so [sign up
here](https://bitbucket.org/account/signup/).

## Fork the repository

You'll need to fork this repository into your own private repository. In the
left hand menu you can click the '+' button.  A menu will slide out. Fork the
repository by clicking 'Fork this repository' to start the process.  Change the
name to be more descriptive and add a description if you like.  Check 'This is a
private repository', so no one else has access to it (we'll add your lab
teammates in a bit). Click the 'Fork repository' button.

## Share the repository

Since you're encouraged to work in teams for the labs, you'll probably want to
share the repository with your teammates.  You also must share your repository
with me (and our course assistants) so that we can grade your work. In the upper
right, there is usually an 'Invite users to this repo' box with a 'Send
invitation' button. Click the button to add users (my username is david_millman,
I will add our course assistants' usernames once I have them). If the 'Invite
users to this repo' box isn't there, you can also add users through the
'Settings' menu on the left hand side. Click 'Settings', then 'User and Group
access', where you can add users.

## Install Git

Now we need to make sure git is installed. There are a number of git GUI
clients, including Bitbucket's
[SourceTree](https://www.atlassian.com/software/sourcetree/overview), or
[others](http://git-scm.com/downloads/guis).  I'll leave you to figure out your
GUI of choice on your own if you like.  I always stick to the command line when
I can, so that's what I'll be showing you how to do. In a terminal run the
following:

    git --version

If you get an error you may need to [download and install
git](http://git-scm.com/downloads).  If you've never used git before you might
want to [read up on the docs](http://git-scm.com/doc), or go through the basics
with [Try Git](try.github.com).

## Clone your repository

To download your repository so it's ready for modifications, we need to clone
it.  Once git is installed, run the following command with <repo url> replaced
with the url to your repository (shown in the upper left of the Overview page on
Bitbucket).  It'll look something like
`https://david_millman@bitbucket.org/david_millman/csci440-spring2018.git`

    git clone <repo url>

It'll ask for your Bitbucket password. You'll have to enter your password every
time you want to push changes up to Bitbucket or pull changes down, unless you
set up SSH keys (go to Manage Account in the top right most menu, then under
security is SSH keys).

## How to pull the latest assignments

I'll be adding assignments here throughout the semester so you'll need to add
this repository as a remote that you can pull changes from. Make sure you cd
into your repository, something like (depending on what you named it):

    cd csci440-spring2018

Then let's list what remotes we currently have:

    git remote -v

You should see two entries for your Bitbucket repository, one (fetch) and one
(push). When you use `git push` or `git pull`, by default you'll push or pull
to/from that url. We want to add another entry that we can explicitly pull from
to merge in assignments as I add them. To do that, run the following:

    git remote add csci441 https://bitbucket.org/msu-cs/csci440-spring2018

Now if you run the `git remote -v` command you'll see two additional entries.
You won't have permission to push to this one, but you will be able to pull new
assignments by running the following:

    git pull csci441 master

Bitbucket also has shortcuts for syncing forked repositories. On the right hand
side on your Bitbucket repository, there will likely be a box indicating your
fork is out of sync when I add new labs. You can click the 'Sync now' link to
automatically pull in the new assignments.

## Install Qt

All assignments and labs will be written in C++ using OpenGL and Qt. Qt is a
cross platform UI framework. There are both commercial and open source licenses
for Qt.  We'll be using the open source version, which can be downloaded
[here](http://www.qt.io/download-open-source/).  Follow the instructions for
installation on your platform.

## Build Lab 1

Once you have Qt installed, try compiling and running the provided lab 1 code.
Qt projects are organized using project files (.pro files). The qt command
`qmake` can generate a Makefile (or an Xcode project, or a Visual Studio
project). I like to stick to using a Makefile so I can stay in a terminal:

    cd lab1
    qmake
    make
    ./lab1

    Windows users:
    cd lab1
    qmake
    mingw32-make
    cd release
    lab1.exe

It should print "Success" to the terminal and triangle.jpg should be a blank,
black image.  (In a future lab, it will be your job to make it output a
triangle). On the lab computers (in EPS 254, and others), multiple versions of
qt are installed on Fedora. To use the right version of qmake use `qmake-qt5`.

## How To Save Your Work

Once you start making changes to your code, you'll want to commit those changes
and push them back up to Bitbucket. You should do this often to keep a good
history of what changes you made and why. It also ensures your files are safely
stored on the server.

For every file you've changed or created, you'll want to run `git add <file
name>`. The command stages the file for commit. You can think of staging a file
as flagging that you want to save it in your next commit. Once you've staged
every file that you want to commit type:

    git commit -m "A short description of what you're committing"

It can be handy to see what files have been changed. To see what changes have
been made you can use `git status`. `git status` will show you which files
you've modified, which files are new and which files have been staged for
commit.

When working in a group, writing good commit messages are very important.  Your
collaborators (and even your future self) will be very thankful for well crafted
messages.  For more on how to write good commit messages, see blogs from
[erlang project](https://github.com/erlang/otp/wiki/writing-good-commit-messages),
[Tim Pope](http://tbaggery.com/2008/04/19/a-note-about-git-commit-messages.html),
or, [Chris Beams](https://chris.beams.io/posts/git-commit/).

Sometimes, git can be a little finicky if you have trailing white space in the
file. Often, your text editor or IDE has an option (or plugin) to automatically
trim trailing white space. It is a good idea to enable automatic trimming of
trailing white space as it can save your some headaches in the future.

Be careful of is to not commit files that are generated by the build process
(i.e. the Makefile, the final executable, .o files, etc.).  I've included a
.gitignore file in the repository that will ignore most files that will be
generated by your build processes, but others may be generated as well that I'm
not aware of (especially if you're running your code on Windows).

You can commit as many times as you want locally. When you're ready to submit
all your commits up to the server, where I can see them, run:

    git push origin master

If you've cloned your repository in more than one location (such as on a lab
computer and on your own laptop) and have made changes to one of them and pushed
those changes up to the server, you can use `git pull` from the other location
to bring it up to date.

## Submitting your work

For the labs, you may be able to just demo your work to me in class or in office
hours before the deadline, but this may be difficult as there are many students.
An alternative would be for the assignment that you are turning in, submit on
D2L.  The submission should contain your your team members' names, a link to
your repository, and hash value of the commit that you are submitting.  (See
below for how to get a commit's hash.)

** Note: Normally with git, forks are used to make changes to a repository that
you don't own. After implementing a feature, usually a pull request is issued
from your fork to the original repository. The maintainers of the original
repository can choose to incorporate your changes or not. Unfortunately, pull
requests on public repositories (like this one), are public as well. So if you
were to turn in your work using pull requests, anyone could view it, so we're
NOT using pull requests. **

## More Git Basics

Git is a distributed version control system (VCS). When you cloned the
repository above, you downloaded every change that has ever been made to the
repository. You can see each individual change by running the following:

    git log

You'll see a list of commits, which are changes to a set of files in your
repository. Each commit looks something like this (this is the first commit to
your repository, made by me):

    commit fd550eaab023eef5deb3f00aa2265d3dbbd5c5ed
    Author: David Millman <david.millman@montana.edu>
    Date:   Thu Jan 4 20:05:31 2018 -0700

        Add initial version of syllabus

The first line shows the hash value for the commit. If you ever want to revert
back to a specific commit you can use `git checkout <hash value>`. In your
repository, you can type the following to get to the very first change ever
made:

    git checkout fd550eaab023eef5deb3f00aa2265d3dbbd5c5ed

To get back to the lastest, you can run:

    git checkout master

For a more, check out a
[fully featured git cheat sheet](https://www.atlassian.com/git/tutorials/atlassian-git-cheatsheet).
The [official git documentation](http://git-scm.com/doc). And a great
course on [Udacity](https://www.udacity.com/course/how-to-use-git-and-github--ud775).
